This, I think, was the link.

And in the absence of psilocybin, you get a recursion back to the previous mode of primate organization, which is a turf-guarding, territorial, egoistic style. And this is the point I really want to make: that psilocybin is a kind of inoculation against the formation of ego. It dissolved the primate ego, and it kept it dissolved until factors—which I'll discuss in a minute—factors limited the availability of the psilocybin. And then this atavistic tendency, the existence of the ego, returned with a tremendous vengeance.

So, the implication of what I'm saying is that the ego, which grows like a calcareous tumor or an abnormal growth in the dynamics of the psyche, can actually be dissolved by repeated exposure to this boundary-dissolving psychedelic compound.

Well, so then, if things were so wonderful, why didn't it just last forever? Why did we fall into history? What happened? Come bring the blood, the right thing: patriarchy, turf consciousness, warfare, city building, and so forth and so on. Well, it's a no-blame story. It's that the very dynamic processes which drove the arboreal apes out of the trees and into this paradisiacal symbiosis on the grasslands—which lasted 25,000, 30,000 years—the very forces which created that ambiance, which were climatological forces (the drying of the planet), destroyed that equilibrium paradise because the drying process did not halt. It continued; it accelerated.

And as we all know, today the Sahara Desert is one of the most inhospitable climates on Earth. I mean, it's a land of endless sand and fantastic high temperatures and no vegetation whatsoever to speak of. Nevertheless, there are archaeological sites out there which are the best evidence for this theory that I'm putting forward. Because in southern Algeria, on the Tassili Plateau, there are rock paintings dated from 12,000 to 15,000 years old that show shamans with mushrooms sprouting out of their bodies—unambiguous because they're not simply being held in the hand. In some cases, when a mushroom-like object is held in the hand, some anthropologists and art historians want to call it a "chopper." But what do you do when there are mushrooms sprouting out of the body by the dozens? I mean, it becomes incontrovertible. So, the archaeological evidence is there. The primate behavior provides evidence for this.

And what happened, I think, is that these orgies, which originally at the heyday of this partnership society were probably at the new and full moon, then as the drying accelerated, became merely lunar (every 28 days instead of 14 days). And then ultimately seasonal, or associated with only certain areas as the rainfall became sparser. And strategies had to be developed then to spread fewer and fewer mushrooms over a wider and wider area.

And I believe that we can even—as long as we're loose in the realm of speculation, we might as well go whole hog—I think what probably happened, based on a fairly careful reading of the archaeological record out there, was that honey emerged as a very important part of this story. Because, you see, if you don't have refrigeration, you can use honey to preserve delicate foods. And to this day, there are parts of Mexico where mushrooms are mixed into honey, and then they don't decay and can be used for many months.

Now, the problem with this is that honey itself has the potential to undergo chemical change and turn itself into a psychoactive substance—but a psychoactive substance with a very different character than psilocybin. In other words, mead. Alcohol. Crude alcoholic beverages probably began with the fermenting of honey and fruit juices. Well, that puts you firmly in the domain of the messed-up culture that we're in.

Because I told you what the qualities of psilocybin were: to promote visual acuity, sexual activity, religious experience, language. What are the qualities of alcohol? What does it do if viewed as a psychedelic drug? Well, it does two things: it lowers sensitivity to social cueing, and it empowers aggressive behavior. In other words, it makes you into a jerk. And, you know, time spent in a busy singles bar on a Friday evening will convince you of the truth of this.

And in a way, it's no joke. I mean, I think probably for a thousand years, nobody got laid in Western civilization unless they were swacked because, you know, people were so uptight on the 'natch, having imbibed this whole monotheistic moral trip, that unless they took a powerful drug which dissolved social inhibitions and empowered aggressive behavior, they weren't able to make a move. How many women can think back to their first sexual imprinting and realize that it occurred in an atmosphere of aggressive use of alcohol? I mean, this is almost the standard model—maybe not so much anymore, but throughout the first five decades of this century, I think that would be a pretty fair statement.

So, you see, drugs are like the invisible lenses through which we view reality. And no culture has been without them. It's just cultures accept some and repress others according to their particular, the particular cultural values which are trying to be conserved.

The reason this is not simply armchair speculation among anthropologists is because we now are the inheritors of a planet which is dying under anesthesia. Our entire cultural crisis is predicated on the fact that we cannot feel or connect with the consequences of our history; that we have behaved very badly—we of the high-tech societies. We have trashed gender relationships. We have trashed aboriginal societies. We have cut down the rainforest. We have robbed our own children of a future as rich as the future that we expect ourselves to enjoy. There isn't even a name for this sin where you destroy the opportunity of your own children. I mean, no society has been that perverse. And we're doing it under a massive infusion of alcohol laced with monotheistic moral propaganda.

Well, what is the antidote to this? Well, it's what I call the Archaic Revival. It's something that's been going on throughout most of the 20th century but with increasing depth and urgency. It's that we must reach back into the past to the last sane moment that we ever knew and figure out what was going on then and get with the program, and attempt to recover some amount of cultural equilibrium and balance.

And I believe that, you know, using the broad brush of generalization, we could say all our problems can be traced down to ego. Ego lies behind private property. It lies behind the domination of women by men. It lies behind dollar-chasing. It lies behind all of the maladaptive behaviors—the arms race, the whole thing. It lies behind all of the maladaptive behaviors that are pushing us toward planetary toxification and species Armageddon.

I'm not advocating a return to the religious style that includes orgy. I mean, I wish I could, but we are not, you know, nomadic pastoralists of 70 individuals. We're a global society of 5 billion, shot through with epidemic diseases and contagion and so forth and so on. We can't adapt the orgiastic style on a mass scale without severe social consequences. But we can look back at the use of psilocybin and at least construct a social alternative where small groups of people are using this to diminish ego and build community—build communities of like-minded people and diminish the almighty sense of ego.

And psilocybin does this very effectively in two ways. First of all, it dissolves boundaries between people. And another way of saying "ego" is that I strongly distinguish between you and me, you know? That's what ego tells you: who you are, how important you are, and how you're not her or him or that or that—you're this. Psilocybin tends to dissolve that language-reinforced misperception.

And the other thing it does is it shows you that behind your eyebrows is a world richer by far than any of the crap that's being peddled on Rodeo Drive or Fifth Avenue in New York City or anywhere else. In other words, it shows you the pathetic nature of materialism by reintroducing you to the reality of the spirit—not as a religious abstraction that's used to beat you over the head to follow somebody's moral recipe, but as a felt experience of the indwelling of an extreme power; a power that connects you to all the life of the past on this planet, to the planetary future, to the universe at large.

So really, it's a rediscovery of our birthright as human beings. History is a bad deal. It's a mess of pottage. It's broken machines and broken dreams because we have projected our value system out into matter. And matter has not responded in a satisfying way. And so we're then dysfunctionally neurotic, always seeking, never finding. The answer is to go within, using the classical tools of self-redefinition, transformation, and ego diminishment.

We can re-inoculate ourselves against the ills of civilization by simply availing ourselves of the shamanic tools that were available before the fall into history. And, you know, the fact that this poses some problem for the currently constituted constabulary is of no concern to anybody who's thinking on a scale of millennia. That's just a kink in the social machinery brought on by stupidity and anxiety. It isn't sufficient reason to turn away from a reasonable program that would carry us toward a group psychology that would then allow us to turn toward the real threats that face us as a species and a planet and do something about it.

I put this before you this evening because I think
